Steel bars, concrete walls, ice cold
water.
Alcatraz was engineered to be
escape-proof. A federal prison built for
inmates too dangerous for anywhere else.
Isolated on a windswept island
surrounded by freezing currents and
layered security systems, it was
designed so that no one would ever
leave.
And yet, in 1962,
three men vanished from their cells,
never to be seen again. To understand
how Alcatraz was constructed, what life
was like inside, and how three brave
prisoners managed to escape, we rebuilt
the entire island in 3D, exactly as it
operated at its peak in the 1950s, piece
by piece, even down to the complex
mechanical system that controlled every
cell door.
Alcatraz Island is a small rocky outcrop
with little vegetation, stark,
unforgiving, and isolated. The name
Alcatraz derives from Isla de los
Alcatraces, meaning Island of the
Pelicans, a title given in 1775
by Spanish naval officer Lieutenant Juan
Manuel de Ayala, who first discovered
it.
It sits roughly 2 km offshore from San
Francisco, surrounded by the chilling
waters of San Francisco Bay, measuring
about 500 m long and 180 m wide. Long
before it became a federal penitentiary,
the island served another purpose.
In the mid-19th century, as San
Francisco expanded rapidly during the
California Gold Rush, the first major
developments took shape, a lighthouse
and Fort Alcatraz, a coastal military
fortification designed to guard the bay.
By the early 1860s, the island took on a
secondary role as a military prison, a
function that steadily expanded over
time.
Around 1910, the upper levels of Fort
Alcatraz's old citadel were torn down
and a new cell house, the structure we
see today, rose above its former
basement level.
That underground space would later
become known as the infamous dungeon of
Alcatraz. We'll return to that later.
The US Army continued using Alcatraz as
a military prison until 1933.
By then, the federal government was
searching for an escape-proof facility,
a place to isolate the most problematic
inmates and send a clear message amid
the surge of organized crime in the
1930s.
The existing cell house was reinforced
with additional security measures and
officially reopened as a federal
penitentiary in 1934.
Not long after, Alcatraz housed some of
the most notorious criminals of the era,
including Al Capone, Machine Gun Kelly,
>> [music]
>> and Alvin Karpis.
By the early 1950s, when Alcatraz was at
its height of operations, the facility
had a variety of daunting and novel
features to keep the prisoners from ever
leaving the island.
First, the only way onto the island was
by boat. The boat dock served as the
main access point, tightly controlled,
closely guarded, and governed by strict
schedules and inspections.
Every arrival and departure [music]
was monitored. Alcatraz's isolation was
its greatest security advantage, but it
also made the island incredibly
expensive to operate. Every piece of
food, fuel, and equipment had to be
brought in by boat. And at the end of
the video, we'll talk about how costs
attributed to the downfall of Alcatraz.
Just uphill from the boat dock stood
building 64, originally constructed as
Army barracks.
During the federal prison years, it was
was into housing and communal space for
prison staff and their families.
>> [music]
>> At any given time, roughly 300 civilian
residents lived on Alcatraz, making it
feel like its own functioning community.
Beside building 64 stood the guardhouse
and sally port, one of the oldest
surviving structures on the island.
Originally the guarded entrance to Fort
Alcatraz, it was also the location where
the island's first military prisoners
were held.
Next to it stood the officers club, a
social and recreational center for the
officers and their families who lived
there, an unexpected contrast to the
rigid confinement only steps away.
Moving toward the northwest corner of
the island stood the quartermaster
warehouse, [music]
a four-level structure used for storage
and workshops.
Large white letters spelling Alcatraz
were painted across its roof,
>> [music]
>> a navigation marker visible to pilots
flying overhead.
Adjoining it was the powerhouse,
supplying electricity to every building
on the island.
Nearby stood the Model Industries
Building, a four-story [music]
structure dating back to the US Army
era. It housed workshops and laundry
facilities where inmates worked, which
was considered a privilege.
In 1939, a newer structure, the New
Industries Building, [music] was
constructed beside it and the laundry
and workshops were transferred there.
Climbing higher, [music] we reach the
water tower, which stored potable water
imported from the mainland. The island
had no natural freshwater supply. Next
to it stood the most recognizable
structure on Alcatraz, the cellhouse, a
three-story building approximately 130 m
long and one of the longest reinforced
concrete structures of its time, was
where inmates were confined for years at
a time.
Directly adjacent was the recreation
[music] yard, an enclosed outdoor space
where inmates could exercise and
socialize under supervision. Yard access
was typically permitted on weekends and
holidays.
From here, prisoners could look out
across San Francisco Bay, their freedom
visible but unreachable.
Next to [music] the cell house, stood
the warden's house, a large residence
serving as the official home of the
prison warden and his family.
Beside it, rose the island's lighthouse.
When the new cell house was built, a
taller concrete lighthouse replaced the
original and it still remains active
today.
At its base, stood the lighthouse
keeper's house.
Finally, in the southeast corner, lay
the parade ground, a large flat area
that provided additional housing for
prison staff and their families,
including three [music] apartment
buildings, one duplex, and four cottages
for senior officers.
Now, let's move inside the heart of the
prison, where steel, concrete, and
routine were engineered to break any
hope of escape, at least [music]
for most.
The cell house was divided into three
sections, the cell room, the north wing,
and the south wing.
The cell room formed the main body of
the structure.
This vast two-story building contained
four separate three-tiered cell blocks,
identified as blocks A, B, C, and D,
totaling 504 cells.
Containing 126 cells, A block retained
its original military prison
configuration and was not retrofitted
during the 1934 conversion.
No inmates were permanently housed there
during the federal prison years and
several cells were even used for
storage. Together, containing 336 cells,
>> [music]
>> blocks B and C were upgraded during the
federal conversion and housed the
general inmate population.
Each cell was meant for only one
prisoner at a time, measuring just 1.5 m
wide by 2.7 m deep.
The inside of the cells can only be
described as minimal and bleak with just
a bed, a sink with cold running water, a
toilet, a small desk for writing, and
two shelves along the back wall for
personal items.
Separated from the rest of the cell room
by [music] a concrete wall was D block,
the segregation unit.
Containing 42 cells, [music]
this newer section was completed in 1941
and used for disciplinary isolation.
Here, privileges were severely
restricted.
Inmates could be confined to their cells
for up to 24 hours per day.
Six of the lower cells, known as the
hole, were the harshest.
Solid steel doors blocked all light,
leaving occupants in total darkness.
At the south end of D block stood the
library containing approximately 15,000
books.
Reading became [music] one of the
primary pastimes for inmates confined to
their cells.
Prisoners could not visit the library.
Instead, books were delivered directly
to them.
At the north end of A block was the
barber shop where inmates received a
monthly haircut.
The corridors [music] connecting these
cell blocks had nicknames, small traces
of personality inside an otherwise rigid
system.
Along the outer wall of A block ran
Sunrise Alley.
Between [music] A and B block was
Michigan Avenue.
The pass between B and C block was
called Broadway and between C and D
block [music] was known simply as CD
Street with the space in front of the
library called Park Avenue.
And inside D block, the isolation unit,
the corridor was known with cruel irony
as Sunset Strip.
These familiar street names echoed
[music] faintly inside one of the most
controlled environments in the country,
reminding prisoners of a distant past
life.
Running through the center of each cell
block was a narrow utility corridor
containing all the plumbing lines for
[music] the cells.
Each inmate cell had a vent in its rear
wall that opened directly into this
space, an overlooked detail that would
later play a crucial role [music] in the
prison's most famous escape.
And because Alcatraz is as iconic as it
is unforgiving, we turned this entire
reconstruction into a detailed poster of
the island at its peak.
Grab yours through the link in the
description. Every purchase directly
supports the channel and the team behind
it.
We're also giving one away.
For a chance to win one, like this
video, subscribe, and comment below.
What surprised you most about the
prison? We'll announce the winner in the
next video.
And a quick shout-out to our last
giveaway winner. Congratulations.
Beneath the tiers of cells, another
space waited, quiet, utilitarian, and
deceptively ordinary.
The cell room basement was accessed by a
set of stairs that opened into a large
open space dominated by a communal
shower.
Shower heads suspended from overhead
pipes above a concrete floor bordered by
a raised curb.
Inmates were required to shower twice a
week.
The water was deliberately kept warm to
prevent inmates from acclimating to the
cold water. Keep that detail in mind.
Finally, next to the shower was the
clothing issue station where inmates
received their clothing after bathing.
But in another area of the cell room,
also hidden below the concrete floor,
>> [music]
>> beyond the reach of daylight, was a
second, more nefarious basement known as
the dungeon of Alcatraz.
As the former basement of the [music]
old citadel, the corridor running around
its outer perimeter had once been the
citadel's dry moat.
In the early years of the federal
prison, this space was used for
disciplinary isolation.
Inmates were escorted down the stairs in
A-block and confined in basement
isolation cells for several days.
Then, they were brought back up through
the D-block stairs and placed into
segregation.
To the rest of the prison population, it
appeared as though those men had
vanished below for months.
The impression served as a powerful
psychological deterrent.
By the late 1930s, [music] this area was
no longer used for confinement. After
that, it served primarily as storage.
Up next, the north wing extended from
the main cellhouse building.
On the ground floor was the dining hall,
also known as the mess hall, where
inmates and prison staff ate their meals
together.
The corridor leading to it was nicknamed
Times Square for the large clock mounted
above the entrance.
Since nearly the entire population
gathered here at once, the dining hall
was considered the most dangerous space
in the prison.
Directly beyond it was the kitchen,
where meals were prepared.
Above the dining hall and kitchen was
the hospital, isolated from the rest of
the prison.
It provided medical and dental care not
only to inmates, but also to prison
staff and their families.
Inside were examination and treatment
rooms, an [music] operating room, and
medical offices.
At one end was a recovery ward, accessed
through a secured gate.
It was divided into barred sections,
each holding multiple beds for inmate
patients.
Moving on, the south wing was the
smaller of the two wings, but it was one
of the most important because it
controlled access into the prison
itself. On the ground floor was the main
entrance to the cell house building.
It also held the prison's administrative
area with several offices, including the
warden's office and the armory where
correctional officers' weapons were
[music] stored.
And to reach the actual prison area, the
cell room, you had [music] to pass
through a fortified sally port guarded
by the armory with bullet-resistant
glass.
It separated the administrative side of
the building from the prison side.
Across from the armory, the control room
we see today wasn't originally part of
the layout. It was added in the late
1950s.
Just past the sally port was the
visitation room where family members
could meet with [music] inmates.
These visits were strictly non-contact.
Inmates and visitors were separated by
thick glass and they spoke through a
telephone.
And it's important to note that
visitation wasn't guaranteed. Inmates
had to earn that privilege and even
then, only one visit per month was
permitted. Outside of the visitation
room was the main gate leading into the
cell room along with stairs that led up
to the second [music] floor.
Up on the second floor was a small
auditorium that served as both a film
screening room and a chapel. Again,
earned privileges, not [music] rights.
This level also included a room for
correctional officers' general use.
Finally, let's talk security and how a
few overlooked details led to some of
the most notorious prison escapes of all
time.
To start, Alcatraz wasn't secured by a
single barrier. It was protected layer
after layer by natural and man-made
barriers intended to prevent escape.
Let's start with the cells themselves.
Three of each cell's walls were solid
concrete.
The fourth side, the front, was barred
with hardened tool-proof steel
specifically designed to resist cutting
and tampering.
The cell doors also worked differently
from traditional locks.
Instead, they were operated remotely by
a central mechanical system that could
open or close individual cells or up to
15 at once.
And remarkably, the entire system was
fully mechanical.
No electricity, just levers, gears, and
linkages. Here's how it worked.
Above every door was a tamper-proof
steel enclosure.
Inside that housing was the mechanism
that controlled that specific door.
Each door rode along a fixed rail using
two wheels.
Attached to it was a coupling link that
could pivot up or down.
The position of that coupling link was
controlled by a sliding bar fitted with
wedges aligned with both ends of the
door.
When the sliding bar shifted, one wedge
forced the coupling link upward,
allowing it to engage with pawls on a
long shifter bar running along the top
of all the doors on the tier.
Once engaged, any lateral movement of
that shifter bar drove the coupling
link, and that movement opened or closed
the door.
As the door traveled, the coupling link
stayed raised as it followed a fixed
guide.
Then, a roller mounted on the door
struck a pivoting arm, returning the
sliding bar to its default position.
When the door reached the end of its
travel, the coupling link reached the
end of the guide and dropped by gravity,
locking the door securely in place.
The doors were operated using three
levers inside a control box located at
the end of each tier.
The first lever was the door selection
lever.
This selected which door would be
operated.
When actuated, it raised or lowered a
vertical bar inside the control box.
A position indicator mounted on that bar
aligned with markings inside the box,
clearly showing which door was selected.
Each door was identified by a numbered
position from one up to 15, depending on
the tier, plus an additional A position
for selecting all doors simultaneously.
At the top of the vertical bar was a
toothed rack segment.
This engaged a pinion gear, rotating a
long horizontal shaft running along the
top of all the doors on the tier, the
same way the sliding bar did.
Mounted on the shaft above each door
were two radial bits.
One bit maintained the same angular
position for all doors and was used to
open every door at once.
The second bit was angularly offset
relative to the first with a unique
offset for each door, allowing
individual doors to be selected.
The second lever was the clutch, which
enabled the selected door or doors.
When actuated, it pushed the shaft
forward.
Each door's sliding bar included a
perpendicular tab.
When one of the bits on the shaft
aligned with that tab and the shaft was
pushed forward, the bit drove the
sliding bar laterally, engaging the
coupling link with the pawls on the
shifter bar and enabling that door.
Using the first and second levers
together, officers could enable all
doors at once or repeat the process to
enable multiple specific doors.
The third and final lever was the door
operating lever.
When actuated, this large lever
translated its motion into the shifter
bar, physically moving all enabled doors
open or closed.
This entire sequence had to be repeated
each time the doors were opened or
closed.
And that was just the beginning.
Inside the prison area, inmates were
counted 13 times per day to ensure no
one was missing.
Every exterior window and opening was
secured with tool proof steel bars.
Electromagnetic metal detectors were
installed in key areas of the prison
along with remote controlled tear gas
canisters in areas including the dining
hall. A space where several riots
occurred throughout Alcatraz's history.
At both ends of the cell blocks,
elevated and barred walkways served as
gun galleries.
Armed officers patrolled these galleries
watching the corridors from above.
And crucially, these walkways were
accessible only from outside the cell
room [music] meaning inmates could never
reach them.
Outside the cell house, the recreation
yard was enclosed by 6 m walls topped
with fencing and barbed wire.
A catwalk ran along the outer perimeter
and was patrolled by armed officers
anytime inmates were allowed outside.
A guard tower stood next to the yard
while additional towers [music]
surrounded the rest of the complex.
Each was equipped with searchlights and
manned by officers carrying high-powered
rifles or machine guns.
And beyond all of that was the prison's
ultimate obstacle, a psychological and
physical barrier unlike anything at a
mainland facility, the water.
With powerful currents and chilling
temperatures, typically around 10° C,
the chances of making it very far are
already slim.
Then once you factor in the 2 km
distance from shore, the task of
successfully escaping becomes nearly
impossible.
In fact, during its operation as a
federal prison, there were 14 escape
attempts involving 34 inmates with two
of them trying twice.
Nearly all were caught or did not
survive.
But there were three men, Frank Morris,
John Anglin, and Clarence Anglin, who
seemed [music] to vanish into thin air
and to this day their fate remains a
mystery.
What we do we however, is that their
escape was made possible through
meticulous planning and the exploitation
of specific vulnerabilities.
Over 6 months, they expanded the vent
openings in the backs of their cells,
openings originally too small for a man
to pass through, using improvised tools.
They camouflage their work with painted
cardboard covers.
On the night of June 11th, 1962, after
lights out and the headcount,
>> [music]
>> they removed the fake vent covers,
slipped into the unguarded utility
corridor behind the cells, and climbed
onto the top of the cell block.
Officers believed the men were asleep
during the nighttime count, fooled by
dummy heads made from soap, toilet
paper, and real hair, a deception that
went undetected until the following
morning.
At the top of the cell block, they
retrieved the makeshift raft and life
jackets they had constructed [music]
from more than 50 stolen raincoats.
From there, they exited through a
ventilator shaft onto the cellhouse
roof, climbed down an exterior pipe to
ground level, and reached the shore of
the island.
What happened next remains uncertain.
There is no confirmed evidence proving
whether they reached the mainland or
drowned in the waters that had stopped
so many before them.
On March 21st, 1963,
Alcatraz closed its doors after 29 years
as a federal prison, not because it
failed, but because it was too expensive
to maintain due to its isolation.
By the late 1950s, it cost nearly three
times more per capita than any other
federal prison, with millions more
needed just to keep the aging facility
standing.
Keeping Alcatraz running had become a
financial burden the government could no
longer justify.
So, the inmates were transferred to
other federal institutions, and the
island entered a period of uncertainty.
Redevelopment proposals came and went
until the Native American occupation of
1969 to 1971 helped reshape its future.
In 1973, Alcatraz reopened. This time,
not as a prison, but as a historic site.
Today, more than 1 million visitors walk
its corridors each year.
While Alcatraz was designed to keep
people in, another kind of structure was
perfected centuries earlier to keep
enemies out.
We broke down how a medieval castle
actually worked in this video, so be
sure to check it out.
Thanks for watching. Stay curious.